Window rfc (#35)
partiql/partiql-docs: RFCs/0035-partiql-window-function.md

# Window Function RFC

## Summary

> This RFC purposes the semantics for using SQL’s window functions that operate on partitions in PartiQL. 

Author: Perhaps : 
```
This RFC purposes the semantics for PartiQL core window clause and PartiQL syntactic sugar for using the well-known SQL window function syntax. 
```

> This RFC purposes the semantics for using SQL’s window functions that operate on partitions in PartiQL. 

Reviewer: Or the same excluding the `well-known`?

> This RFC purposes the semantics for using SQL’s window functions that operate on partitions in PartiQL. 

Author: Addressed in the new commit.

## Guide-level explanation

### Out of scope

* This RFC focus on explaining the semantics of PartiQL’s window functions. The PartiQL core syntax provided in this RFC is for guidance only. Finalizing grammar and syntax is out of the scope, excluding the supported SQL compatible window function. 
* SQL’s window implicitly defines three concepts, partition, frame, and peer. As a first step, this RFC focus on partition only, the concept of frame and peer are out of scope for now, but some preliminary work has been done to make sure the other concepts can fit into the framework in a modular fashion.
* An exhaustive mapping between SQL’s window function and PartiQL’s expression is out of the scope. In this RFC, we only define the mapping between SQL’s `lag` function and it's corresponding PartiQL expression as an example. The mapping between other functions are skipped.

We assume that the readers of this RFC has basic understanding of SQL’s window function and PartiQL semantics.

### Terminology

1. RFC key word: MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHALL, SHALL NOT, etc. See Appendix (1) for detail. 

> 2. Windowed Table and Window: Windowed table is a defined in SQL spec 2011, section 4.15.14. A **windowed table** is a table together with one or more windows. A **window** is a transient data structure associated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Windowed Table and Window: Windowed table is as defined in SQL spec 2011, section 4.15.14. A **windowed table** is a table together with one or more windows. A **window** is a transient data structure associated
```

   with a table expression. A window is defined explicitly by a window definition or implicitly by an inline window specification. Implicitly defined windows have an implementation-dependent window name. A
   **window** is used to specify window partitions and window frames, which are collections of rows used in the definition of **window functions**.
3. Partition: To distinguish between SQL's definition of window, in this RFC, the term **partition** refers to the window partition specified for each row. See [SQL’s Windowed Table As Nested Data](#SQL’s-Windowed-Table-As-Nested-Data) for details. 

> 4. Equivalent Partition: Two binding tuples $b, b' \in B^{in}_{WINDOWED}$ are in the same equivalence partition if and only if every partition expression $e_i$ evaluates to equivalent values $v_i$ (when evaluted on b) and $v_i'$ (when evaluated on $b'$). 

Reviewer: I know we likely don't have it but let's also include a term for `PartiQL core` to state what we mean by that because it's been used in different sections of the doc.

Author: Make sense. The spec has a nice definition here. We can resurfacing it here and point to the spec. 

From the spec: 

PartiQL core and PartiQL syntactic sugar:  In the interest of precision and succinctness, we tier the PartiQL specification in two layers: The PartiQL core is a functional programming language with composable aspects. Three aspects of the PartiQL core syntax and semantics are characteristic of its functional orientation: Every (sub)query and every (sub) expression input and output PartiQL data. Second, each clause of a SELECT query is itself a function. Third, every (sub)query evaluates within the environment created by the database names and the variables of the enclosing queries.
Then we layer “syntactic sugar” features over the core. Commonly, syntactic sugar achieves well-known SQL syntax and semantics. Formally, every syntactic sugar feature is explained by reduction to the core.

Reviewer: +1

Author: Addressed in the new commit.

> ### SQL’s Windowed Table As Nested Data

Reviewer: I still see a disconnect between this section and the next; how can we make the connection to the next section more obvious? Does it make sense to have this section as a sub-section of the next section and explain its relation with the way we transform B<sub>in</sub><sup>WINDOWED</sup> to B<sub>out</sub><sup>WINDOWED</sup>?

Author: Thanks for the call out. I think it makes sense. Thinking about this more, the gap can come from the jump from SQL to partiQL to SQL again. Maybe we rename the section to `Partition As Nested Data`

```
### PartiQL’s Window Function Semantics

In the following section, we first define the semantics for `WINDOWED` clause in PartiQL.
The PartiQL `WINDOWED` clause can be thought of as a standalone operator that inputs a collection of binding tuples and outputs a collection of binding tuples.

Informally: 
Each binding tuple outputted by the `WINDOWED` clause contains "information" regarding: 1) the current binding tuple from the input, 2) the partition for the current binding tuple, 3) the index for access the current binding tuple in partition. 

This section proceed in four steps: 
 - Section [Partition As Nested Data] explains how to create a partition for each row/binding tuple, such partition created will be incorporated into the binding tuple produced by `WINDOWED` clause.  
 - Section [WINDOWED Clause](#WINDOWED-Clause) explains the core PartiQL WINDOWED structure and the binding tuples created by `WINDOWED` clause.
 - Section [Operations on Partition](#Operations-Over-Partition) explains how to perform operation over the produced partition data. 
 - Section [SQL Compatibility](#SQL-Compatibility) shows that SQL's window functions can be explained over by PartiQL's `WINDOWED` clause and expressions. 

#### Partition As Nested Data
In this section, we introduce a way to model partition as nested data. Notice that the nested data format, although not fitting in SQL's formal semantics, provides a simple and intuitive way to understand window function results, and forms the basis for PartiQL's window semantics. 
...
```

Reviewer: +1 This is way better and reminds of the spec.'s language.

Author: Addressed in the new commit.

In this section, we introduce a way to model SQL's windowed table as nested data.
Notice that the nested data format, although not fitting in SQL's formal semantics, provides a simple and intuitive way to understand window function results, and forms the basis for PartiQL's window semantics. 

SQL’s in-line window function that operates without frame clause looks like:

> ```sql

Reviewer: Can we also exemplify this (E.g. adding the syntax for `LAG`)

Author: Do you mean: 

```
For example, the syntax for `LAG` function in SQL is: 

LAG (expression [,offset] [,default])  
   OVER ( 
            [PARTITION BY <partition_expression>] 
            ORDER BY <sort spec> )
```

I was a little concerned about adding this will raised the question on "what is lag function" or "what is offset" or "why is ORDER BY not optional for `LAG` here", those questions are answered in later section [Using SQL’s inline window function in PartiQL].

Reviewer: Yes, and we can link to external documentation or mention that there will be more context in the upcoming sections.

Author: Addressed in the new commit.

            'price' : 121.09
          >>
      ]
  }    
  -- rest of the data skiped
  ...  
>>
```

Example 1.4:

Window specification has both PARTITION BY AND ORDER BY sub-clause

Notice that to demonstrate the difference visually, the result will be sorted in descending order.

`<func> OVER (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY price DESC)  -- has PARTITION BY and ORDER BY sub-clause`

![Example 1.4 Graph](./0035-partiql-window-function/Example_1_4.png)

```
<<
 -- Row 1
  {
    'trade_date' : 2022-09-30,
    'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
    'price', 113.00
    -- partition for row 1
    'partition' : 
      [
          <<
            'trade_date' : 2022-10-04,
            'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
            'price' : 121.09
          >>,
          <<
            'trade_date' : 2022-10-03,
            'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
            'price' : 115.88
          >>,
          <<
            'trade_date' : 2022-09-30,
            'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
            'price' : 113.00
          >>
      ]
  }
  -- rest of the data skiped
  ...  
>>
```

### PartiQL’s Window Function Semantics

In the following section, we first define the semantics for `WINDOWED` clause in PartiQL.

> The PartiQL `WINDOWED` clause can be thought of a standalone operator that inputs a collection of binding tuples and outputs a collection of binding tuples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PartiQL `WINDOWED` clause can be thought of as a standalone operator that inputs a collection of binding tuples and outputs a collection of binding tuples.
```

The PartiQL `WINDOWED` clause can be thought of as a standalone operator that inputs a collection of binding tuples and outputs a collection of binding tuples.

Informally:
Each binding tuple outputted by the `WINDOWED` clause contains "information" regarding: 1) the current binding tuple from the input, 2) the partition for the current binding tuple, 3) the index for access the current binding tuple in partition.

This section proceed in four steps:
- Section [Partition As Nested Data](#Partition-As-Nested-Data) explains how to create a partition for each row/binding tuple, such partition created will be incorporated into the binding tuple produced by `WINDOWED` clause.
- Section [WINDOWED Clause](#WINDOWED-Clause) explains the core PartiQL WINDOWED structure and the binding tuples created by `WINDOWED` clause.
- Section [Operations on Partition](#Operations-Over-Partition) explains how to perform operation over the produced partition data.
- Section [SQL Compatibility](#SQL-Compatibility) shows that SQL's window functions can be explained over by PartiQL's `WINDOWED` clause and expressions.

#### Partition As Nested Data

> In this section, we introduce a way to model partition as nested data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we introduce a way to model partition as nested data. The intention for doing so is to be able to use this nested-data in order to produce the final output of `WINDOWED` clause.
```

The reason for such choice will be further explained in the next section.

Consider the input data to be:

```
<<
  {
    'trade_date' : 2022-09-30,
    'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
    'price' : 113.00
  },
  {
    'trade_date' : 2022-10-03,
    'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
    'price' : 115.88
  },
  {
    'trade_date' : 2022-10-04,
    'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
    'price' : 121.09
  },
  {
    'trade_date' : 2022-09-30,
    'ticker' : 'GOOG', 
    'price' : 96.15
  },
  {
    'trade_date' : 2022-10-03,
    'ticker' : 'GOOG', 
    'price' : 99.30
  },
  {
    'trade_date' : 2022-10-04,
    'ticker' : 'GOOG', 
    'price' : 101.04
  }         
>>
```

Example 1.1.2:

Let us consider a simple example with no `PARTITION BY` and `ORDER BY` sub-clause:

`<func> OVER () -- window specification is empty`.

![Example 1.1.2 Graph](./0035-partiql-window-function/Example_1_1.png)

The above figure shows the original table with partition for each row. Notice that
since there is no `PARTITION BY` sub-clause, the entire table are considered as within the same partition
and since there is no `ORDER BY` sub-clause, there is no deterministic order for the partition.

> We can turn the final result in the above figure in nested data format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can turn the result in the above figure in a nested data format:
```

            'price' : 115.88
          >>,
          <<
            'trade_date' : 2022-10-04,
            'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
            'price' : 121.09
          >>
      ]
  }    
  -- rest of the data skiped
  ...  
>>
```

Example 1.1.5:

Window specification has both PARTITION BY AND ORDER BY sub-clause

Notice that to demonstrate the difference visually, the result will be sorted in descending order.

`<func> OVER (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY price DESC)  -- has PARTITION BY and ORDER BY sub-clause`

![Example 1.1.5 Graph](./0035-partiql-window-function/Example_1_4.png)

```
<<
 -- Row 1
  {
    'trade_date' : 2022-09-30,
    'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
    'price', 113.00
    -- partition for row 1
    'partition' : 
      [
          <<
            'trade_date' : 2022-10-04,
            'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
            'price' : 121.09
          >>,
          <<
            'trade_date' : 2022-10-03,
            'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
            'price' : 115.88
          >>,
          <<
            'trade_date' : 2022-09-30,
            'ticker' : 'AMZN', 
            'price' : 113.00
          >>
      ]
  }
  -- rest of the data skiped
  ...  
>>
```

> #### WINDOWED Clause 

Reviewer: Going through this section — with reading the previous section — I still see a gap. Maybe if we show the usage of the nested data in one of the examples we can fill this gap, but as of now, the previous section seems disconnected from the whole RFC.

Author: Reorganized the work a bit based on our discussion. 

Move the section to the Appendix.

```sql
WINDOWED (
    PARTITION BY e1, e2, ..., em
    ORDER BY (o1 [ASC|DESC]? [NULLS FIRST| NULLS LAST]?,
              ...,
              on [ASC|DESC]? [NULLS FIRST| NULLS LAST]?
    ) PARTITION AS p AT pos
```

Where $e_1,...,e_n$ is a list of **partition expressions**, $o_1,....,o_n$ is a list of **ordering expressions**, $p$ is the **partition variable**, and $pos$ is the **position variable** which indicates the position of the current row in the partition.

> The `WINDOWED` clause can be viewed as a modular function, with $B^{in}_{WINDOWED}$ (a bag of binding tuples) as an input parameter to the function.

Reviewer: Moving this line before the grammar?

Author: Addressed in the new commit.

* If there is no `PARTITION BY`, the entire input binding collection is considered as one partition.
* Each of the $B_i$ produced by `PARTITION BY` SHALL be a list instead of a bag, even though the order is non-deterministic at the moment. The partition needs to be a list because we want to use the index to locate the original row.

2. ORDER BY sub-clause:

* If ORDER BY is presented, each equivalence partition is ordered based on the rules defined in Spec Section 12 (Appendix 3).
* Notice that the ORDER BY in WINDOWED clause applies to partition only, it does not necessarily affect the final order of the result.

3. WINDOWED clause output:

* For each binding tuple $b_i$ in $B^{in}_{WINDOWED}$, output $b = b_i || < p : B_i, pos: x>$ where $b_i$ in $B_i$ and $p[x] = b_i$.
* Notice that in case of duplication, the pos is nondeterministic but **MUST** be guaranteed to be unique.

Logically, `WINDOWED` clause is evaluated after `GROUP BY` and `HAVING` and before `ORDER BY`, the evaluation order looks like:

```
FROM -> WHERE -> GROUP BY -> HAVING -> WINDOWED -> ORDER BY -> LIMIT -> SELECT 
```

#### Examples

> Suppose  $B^{in}_{WINDOWED}$ is:

Reviewer: I really like how spec — when exemplifying — starts from the actual data and also the query and then steps through each stage with Bin and Bouts. Can we also do the same here for at least one of the examples?

Author: Addressed in the new commit. See example 4.1 (sorry changed the index system a bit)

        ],
    pos: 0
  >,
  <
    'month': 9, 'ticker': 'GOOG',
    'g': <<
              <
                'stock': { 'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'GOOG', 'price': 96.15 }
              >
         >>
    p : [ 
          <
            'month': 9, 'ticker': 'GOOG',
            'g': <<
                   <
                    'stock': { 'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'GOOG', 'price': 96.15 }
                   >
                  >>
          >        
        ],
    pos : 0    
  >,
  <
    'month': 10, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
    'g': <<
      <
        'stock': { 'trade_date': `2022-10-03`, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 115.88 }
      >
    >>
    p : [
          < 'month': 9, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
            'g': << 
              <
                'stock': { 'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 113.00 }
              >
            >>
          >, 
          < 'month': 10, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
             'g': <<
               <
                 'stock': { 'trade_date': `2022-10-03`, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 115.88 }
               >
             >>
          >
        ],
    pos: 1
  >
>>
```

Example 1.2.6: Data set with NULL and MISSING: 

> Recall that the equivalence function will treat the **NULL** and the **MISSING** expression as the same: 

Reviewer: It's good that we're referring to equivalence class here but let's also add another note explaining the behavior based on the equivalence rule for `NULL` and `MISSING`; like the following quote from section `11.1.1`:
```
Notice that both the 3rd and 5th tuples of logs were grouped under the sensor:null group, despite the sensor of
the 3rd being NULL while the sensor of the 5th being MISSING. The query result is
```

Author: Addressed in the new commit.

        ],
    pos: 0
   >,
   <
    stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': NULL, 'price': 96.15},
    p : [
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': 'NULL', 'price': 96.15}>,
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-10-03, 'price': 100.00}>,
          <stock : {'price': 200.00}>
        ],
    pos: 0
   >,
   <
    stock : {'trade_date': 2022-10-03, 'price': 100.00},
    p : [
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': 'NULL', 'price': 96.15}>,
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-10-03, 'price': 100.00}>,
          <stock : {'price': 200.00}>
        ],
    pos: 1
   >,
   <
    stock : {'price': 200.00},
    p : [
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': 'NULL', 'price': 96.15}>,
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-10-03, 'price': 100.00}>,
          <stock : {'price': 200.00}>
        ],
    pos: 2
   > 
>>
```

#### Operations Over Partition

The `WINDOWED` clause computes the partition for each row and carry the partition in the input binding tuples. 

Like other clauses, the output of binding tuples from `WINDOWED` clauses becomes the input of next operator. 

> The scoping rules and path navigation behave as normal. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scoping rules and path navigation behave as what has already been specified in the spec's sections `3.4` and `10`.
```

    }
FROM stock AS stock
WINDOWED (
        PARTITION BY stock.ticker
        ORDER BY stock.trade_date
    ) PARTITION AS p AT pos
```

Note that the casting to list is necessary because SELECT VALUE wraps the result in a bag. 

#### SQL Compatibility

For SQL compatibility, PartiQL allows use of SQL syntax directly.

SQL allows three ways to specify window:
1) inline window specification:

Example 1.4.1: 
```sql
SELECT 
    rank() OVER (PARTITION BY ticker), -- inline window specification
    lag(price) OVER (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY date)
FROM stock as s
```

2) window clause

Example 1.4.2:
```sql
SELECT 
    rank() OVER w1,
    lag(price) OVER w2
FROM stock as s
WINDOW w1 AS (PARTITION BY ticker) -- window clause
       w2 AS (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY date) -- window clause
```

3) reuse window definition

Example 1.4.3:
```sql
SELECT
    rank() OVER w1,
    lag(price) OVER w2
FROM stock as s
WINDOW w1 AS (PARTITION BY ticker)
       w2 AS (w1 ORDER BY date) -- reuse window definition
```
The above three queries are functionally the same.

We can rewrite a query in SQL’s window function syntax to PartiQL syntax.

Suppose that a query:

> 1. Is a SELECT query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Is an select-from-where (SFW) query
```

                                SELECT * FROM stock_price AS inter
                                WHERE inter.ticker = curr.ticker
                                  AND inter.trade_date < curr.trade_date
                                  AND inter.trade_date > prev.trade_date)
     ) AS non_null_prev
     ON all_record.trade_date = non_null_prev.trade_date
         AND all_record.ticker = non_null_prev.ticker
```

With lag function, the query can be simplified as

```sql
-- Query in SQL syntax
SELECT s.trade_date as trade_date, 
       s.ticker as ticker, 
       s.price as current_price,
       lag(s.price) OVER (PARTITION BY s.ticker ORDER BY s.trade_date) as previous_price
    FROM stock as s

-- Equivalent PartiQL Core query
-- See Example 1.2.4 for the Binding Tuples created by WINDOWED clause 
SELECT value {
    'date' : s.trade_date,
    'ticker' : s.ticker,
    'previous_price': 
        CASE WHEN ws_1_pos - 1 >= 0 THEN
            CAST (SELECT VALUE s.price FROM ws_1_partition AT idx WHERE idx = ws_1_pos - 1 AS LIST)[0]
        ELSE NULL END
    }
FROM stock as s
WINDOWED
    (PARTITION BY s.ticker ORDER BY s.trade_date) 
        PARTITION AS ws_1_partition AT ws_1_pos

> /*
>  result:       
> << 
> <<
>   {
>     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
>     'current_price': 113.00, 'previous_price': NULL
>   },
>   {
>     'trade_date': `2022-10-03`, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
>     'current_price': 115.88, 'previous_price': 113.00
>   },
>   {
>     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'GOOG',
>     'current_price': 96.15, 'previous_price': NULL
>   }
> >>
> >>   
> */     

Reviewer: ```suggestion

-- result:       
-- << 
-- <<
--   {
--     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
--     'current_price': 113.00, 'previous_price': NULL
--   },
--   {
--     'trade_date': `2022-10-03`, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
--     'current_price': 115.88, 'previous_price': 113.00
--   },
--   {
--     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'GOOG',
--     'current_price': 96.15, 'previous_price': NULL
--   }
-- >>
-- >>       
```

    'ticker' : ticker, 
    'current_month_average' : COLL_AVG(SELECT VALUE v.s.price FROM g AS v) ,
    -- ticker and month does not get rewritten
    'previous_month_avg': 
        lag(
            COLL_AVG(SELECT VALUE v.s.price FROM g AS v)
        ) 
            OVER (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY month)
    }
    FROM stock as s
    GROUP BY EXTRACT(MONTH FROM s.trade_date) as month, 
             s.ticker as ticker 
    GROUP as g

-- step 2: rewrite window
-- See Example 1.2.5 for the Binding Tuples created by WINDOWED clause
SELECT VALUE {
    'current_month' : month, 
    'ticker' : ticker, 
    'current_month_average' : COLL_AVG(SELECT VALUE v.s.price FROM g AS v) ,
    'previous_month_avg':     
        CASE WHEN ws_1_pos - 1 >= 0 THEN
            CAST (SELECT VALUE COLL_AVG(SELECT VALUE v.s.price FROM g AS v) FROM ws_1_partition AT idx WHERE idx = ws_1_pos - 1 AS LIST)[0]
        ELSE NULL END
    }
    FROM stock as s
    GROUP BY EXTRACT(MONTH FROM s.trade_date) as month, 
             s.ticker as ticker 
    GROUP as g
    WINDOWED
    (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY month) 
        PARTITION AS ws_1_partition AT ws_1_pos
            
            

> /*
>  result:
>   {
>     'current_month': 9, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
>     'current_month_average': 113.00, 'previous_month_avg': NULL
>   },
>   {
>     'current_month': 10, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
>     'current_month_average': 115.88, 'previous_month_avg': 113.00
>   },
>   {
>     'current_month': 9, 'ticker': 'GOOG',
>     'current_month_average': 96.15, 'previous_month_avg': NULL
>   }
> >>
> */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- result:
-- <<
--   {
--     'current_month': 9, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
--     'current_month_average': 113.00, 'previous_month_avg': NULL
--   },
--   {
--     'current_month': 10, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
--     'current_month_average': 115.88, 'previous_month_avg': 113.00
--   },
--   {
--     'current_month': 9, 'ticker': 'GOOG',
--     'current_month_average': 96.15, 'previous_month_avg': NULL
--   }
-- >>
```

```

Example 3.3: Outer Order By

```sql
-- query
SELECT s.trade_date as trade_date,
       s.ticker as ticker,
       s.price as current_price,
       lag(s.price) OVER (PARTITION BY s.ticker ORDER BY s.trade_date) as previous_price
FROM stock as s
ORDER BY s.trade_date DESC

-- Equivalent PartiQL Core query
-- See Example 1.2.4 for the Binding Tuples created by WINDOWED clause 
SELECT value {
    'date' : s.trade_date,
    'ticker' : s.ticker,
    'previous_price': 
        CASE WHEN ws_1_pos - 1 >= 0 THEN
            CAST (SELECT VALUE s.price FROM ws_1_partition AT idx WHERE idx = ws_1_pos - 1 AS LIST)[0]
        ELSE NULL END
    }
FROM stock as s
WINDOWED
    (PARTITION BY s.ticker ORDER BY s.trade_date) 
        PARTITION AS ws_1_partition AT ws_1_pos
ORDER BY s.trade_date DESC

> /*
>  result:
> [
>   {
>     'trade_date': `2022-10-03`, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
>     'current_price': 115.88, 'previous_price': 113.00
>   },
>   {
>     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
>     'current_price': 113.00, 'previous_price': NULL
>   },
>   {
>     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'GOOG',
>     'current_price': 96.15, 'previous_price': NULL
>   }
> ]
> */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- result:
-- [
--   {
--     'trade_date': `2022-10-03`, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
--     'current_price': 115.88, 'previous_price': 113.00
--   },
--   {
--     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
--     'current_price': 113.00, 'previous_price': NULL
--   },
--   {
--     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'GOOG',
--     'current_price': 96.15, 'previous_price': NULL
--   }
-- ]
*/
```

                             ELSE NULL END
    }
FROM stock AS stock
WINDOWED (
        PARTITION BY stock.ticker
        ORDER BY stock.trade_date
    ) PARTITION AS p AT pos
```

Note that the casting to list is necessary because `SELECT VALUE` wraps the result in a bag. See example 4.1 for a more detailed walk through. 

#### SQL Compatibility

For SQL compatibility, PartiQL allows use of SQL syntax directly.

SQL allows three ways to specify window:
1) inline window specification:

Example 3.1: 
```sql
SELECT 
    rank() OVER (PARTITION BY ticker), -- inline window specification
    lag(price) OVER (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY trade_date)
FROM stock as s
```

2) window clause

Example 3.2:
```sql
SELECT 
    rank() OVER w1,
    lag(price) OVER w2
FROM stock as s
WINDOW w1 AS (PARTITION BY ticker) -- window clause
       w2 AS (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY trade_date) -- window clause
```

3) reuse window definition

Example 3.3:
```sql
SELECT
    rank() OVER w1,
    lag(price) OVER w2
FROM stock as s
WINDOW w1 AS (PARTITION BY ticker)
       w2 AS (w1 ORDER BY trade_date) -- reuse window definition
```
The above three queries are functionally the same.

> We can rewrite a query in SQL’s window function syntax to PartiQL syntax.
> 
> Suppose that a query:
> 1. Is an select-from-where (SFW) query
> 2. the SELECT clause contains one or more SQL window function (identified by OVER)
> 
> Then the query is rewritten using the following process:
> 
> * If the query contains variants of SQL's WINDOW clause, rewrite the query in form of inline window specification by replacing the window alias with the specification associated with it.
> * Denote each window function as $wf_i$, its window specification $ws_i$
> * Add a WINDOWED keyword(if not already exist)
> * For each window function $wf_i$:
> * Add the inline window specification $ws_i$
> * Add PARTITION AS $ws\\_i\\_partition$ AT $ws\\_i\\_pos$
> * Rewrite $wf_i$ into $wf'_i$ where $wf'_i$ is a PartiQL expression. Note $wf_i$ does not necessary need to be a function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can rewrite a query in SQL’s window function syntax to PartiQL syntax.

Suppose that a query:
1. Is an select-from-where (SFW) query
2. the SELECT clause contains one or more SQL window function (identified by OVER)

Then the query is rewritten using the following process:

* If the query contains variants of SQL's WINDOW clause, rewrite the query in form of inline window specification by replacing the window alias with the specification associated with it.

E.g: From:
```sql
SELECT 
    rank() OVER w1,
    lag(price) OVER w2
FROM stock as s
WINDOW w1 AS (PARTITION BY ticker) -- window clause
       w2 AS (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY trade_date) -- window clause
```

To:
```sql
SELECT 
    rank() OVER (PARTITION BY ticker),
    lag(price) OVER  (PARTITION BY ticker ORDER BY trade_date) 
FROM stock as s
```

* Denote each window function (E.g. `rank()`) as $wf_i$, its window specification $ws_i$ (E.g. `PARTITION BY ticker`).
* Create a `WINDOWED` clause
  * For each window function $wf_i$:
  * Add the inline window specification $ws_i$
  * Add PARTITION AS $ws\\_i\\_partition$ AT $ws\\_i\\_pos$

E.g.:
```sql
WNDOWED
    (PARTITION BY l.ticker ORDER BY l.trade_date) 
        PARTITION AS ws_1_partition AT ws_1_pos
    (PARTITION BY l.ticker ORDER BY l.trade_date)
        PARTITION AS ws_2_partition AT ws_2_pos
```

* Rewrite $wf_i$ into $wf'_i$ where $wf'_i$ is a PartiQL expression. Note $wf_i$ does not necessary need to be a function and is implementation specific.
```

                  ELSE NULL END
FROM stock as s
WINDOWED
    (PARTITION BY l.ticker ORDER BY l.trade_date) 
        PARTITION AS ws_1_partition AT ws_1_pos
    (PARTITION BY l.ticker ORDER BY l.trade_date)
        PARTITION AS ws_2_partition AT ws_2_pos
```

### Using SQL’s inline window function in PartiQL

For completeness, we show how to use SQL’s `LAG` and `LEAD` window function in PartiQL.

Supported grammar:

```
<window function> ::= <window function type> OVER <window specification> 
<window function type> ::= <lead or lag function>
<lead or lag function> ::= <lead or lag> <left paren> <lead or lag extent> 
    [ <comma> <offset> 
        [ <comma> < default expression] ] <right paren> 
<lead or lag> :: LEAD | LAG
<lead or lag extend> ::= <expr query>
<offset> :: <extract numeric literal> (* SQL spec*)
<default expresion> ::= <value expr> (* Defined in RFC-0011 *)
<window specification> ::= 
    <left paren> <window specification detail> <right paren>
<window specificaition detail> ::= 
    [ <window partition clause> ]
    [ <window order by clause> ]
    
<window partition clause> ::= PARTITION BY <window partition reference list>

> <window partition reference list> ::= <expr query> [ <expr query> ... ]

Reviewer: Do we need a `<comma>` here?

          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-10-03, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 115.88}>
        ],
    ws_1_pos: 0
   >,
   <
    stock : {'trade_date': 2022-10-03, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 115.88},
    ws_1_partition : [
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 113.00}>,
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-10-03, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 115.88}>
        ],
    ws_1_pos: 1
   >,
   <
    stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': 'GOOG', 'price': 96.15},
    ws_1_partition : [
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': 'GOOG', 'price': 96.15}>
        ],
    ws_1_pos: 0
   > 
>>
```

For the first tuple, `ws_1_pos - 1 = -1` therefore the `previous_price` will be null. 
For the second tuple, `ws_1_pos - 1 = 0`, we evaluate the expression `CAST (SELECT VALUE s.price FROM ws_1_partition AT idx WHERE idx = ws_1_pos - 1 AS LIST)[0]`.

B<sup>OUT</sup><sub>FROM</sub> = B<sup>IN</sup><sub>WHERE</sub>  =
```
<<
    <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 113.00}, idx: 0>,
    <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-10-03, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 115.88}, idx: 1>
>>
```

> Notice here the `FROM` clause outputs a bag instead of a list. (See Spec section 5.1 Ranging Over Bags and Arrays)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice here the `FROM` clause outputs a bag instead of a list. (See [PartiQL specification 2019, Section 5.1, Ranging Over Bags and Arrays](https://partiql.org/assets/PartiQL-Specification.pdf#subsection.5.1)).
```

--   {
--     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'AMZN',
--     'current_price': 113.00, 'previous_price': NULL
--   },
--   {
--     'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'GOOG',
--     'current_price': 96.15, 'previous_price': NULL
--   }
-- ]
```

Notice here the output is a list, whereas the results in previous query return a bag. This is because the ORDER BY sub-clause only order the partition.

Example 3.5: Missing Binding

It is worth to distinguish between `out of window partition` and `no such binding.`

Consider:

```sql
-- query
SELECT 
       lag(s.a, 1, 'Out Of Partition') 
            OVER (PARTITION BY s.ticker ORDER BY s.trade_date) as previous_a
FROM stock as s

-- Equivalent PartiQL Core query
SELECT value {
    'previous_a': 
        CASE WHEN ws_1_pos - 1 >= 0 THEN
            CAST (SELECT VALUE s.a FROM ws_1_partition AT idx WHERE idx = ws_1_pos - 1 AS LIST)[0]
        ELSE 'Out Of Partition' END
    }
FROM stock as s
WINDOWED
    (PARTITION BY s.ticker ORDER BY s.trade_date) 
        PARTITION AS ws_1_partition AT ws_1_pos

-- result
-- <<
--  {
--    'previous_a': 'Out Of Partition'
--  },
--  {},
--  {
--    'previous_a': 'Out Of Partition'
--  }
>>
```

> The first row returns `{ 'previous_a': 'Out of Partition' }` because current row is the first row in partition, and `lag(sp.a)` tries to access the row before, which is out of the window partition. Therefore, it returns the default value.
> The second row returns an empty struct `{}` , this is because the current row is now the second row, and `lag(sp.a)` essentially evaluates `sp.a` over the binding tuple `{ 'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 113.00}`. Since there is no binding name `a` in the binding tuple, the query returns `missing` in permissive mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first row returns `{ 'previous_a': 'Out of Partition' }` because current row is the first row in partition, and `lag(sp.a)` tries to access the row before, which is out of the window partition. Therefore, it returns the default value.
The second row returns an empty struct `{}` , this is because the current row is now the second row, and `lag(sp.a)` essentially evaluates `sp.a` over the binding tuple `{ 'trade_date': `2022-09-30`, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 113.00}`. Since there is no binding name `a` in the binding tuple, the query returns `missing` in permissive mode as outlined in [PartiQL specification 2019](https://partiql.org/assets/PartiQL-Specification.pdf).
```

        { 'trade_date' : 2022-10-03, 'ticker' : 'AMZN', 'price' : 115.88 },
        { 'trade_date' : 2022-09-30, 'ticker' : 'GOOG', 'price' : 96.15 }
   >>         
>
```

If we would like to retrieve the current price and the previous price of a given stock, and if there is no previous data, we want to return null.
```sql
SELECT VALUE
    {'ticker' : stock.ticker,
     'current_price': stock.price,
     'previous_price' : CASE WHEN pos - 1 >= 0 THEN CAST ( SELECT VALUE stock.price FROM p AT idx WHERE idx = pos - 1 AS LIST)[0]
                             ELSE NULL END
    }
FROM stock AS stock
WINDOWED (
        PARTITION BY stock.ticker
        ORDER BY stock.trade_date
    ) PARTITION AS p AT pos
```

The `WINDOWED` clause outputs a collection of binding tuples(See Example 1.4), which is consumed by the SELECT clause:

B<sup>OUT</sup><sub>WINDOWED</sub> = B<sup>IN</sup><sub>SELECT</sub>  =

```
<<
   <
    stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 113.00},
    ws_1_partition : [
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-09-30, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 113.00}>,
          <stock : {'trade_date': 2022-10-03, 'ticker': 'AMZN', 'price': 115.88}>
        ],

>     ws_1_pos: 0

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be `p` and not `ws_1_partition` and `pos` and not `ws_1_pos`?

Author: It should. Thanks for point that out and the detailed review.
